
From ...
http://itsignals.cascadia.com.au/?p=28

DISCLAIMER: Take care in what you do, make sure you have a reliable backup
of the VM image before you start. You do this at your own risk, I accept
no responsibility if it all goes wrong.

So let’s dive in…

Step 1: Stop the VM

Step 2: Change to the directory where your VM image files are stored,
mine is in /kvm/ubuntu-dev/

	cd /kvm/ubuntu-dev

Here is what my 20GB file looks like.

	<http://itsignals.cascadia.com.au/img/original_image_file.png>

Step 3: Backup the image file, my image file is called ubuntu-dev.img.
I created a sub-directory called bak where I store my image backup file

	sudo cp ubuntu-dev.img bak/ubuntu-dev.img.bak

Step 4: Create a blank qemu file, this is the file we will be adding to
our VM image. Create it with a size equal to the amount of extra disk
space you want added to your VM. In my case I want to add an additional
30GB of space.

	sudo qemu-img create -f raw addon.raw 30G

This is what the addon file looks like on my system after it is created.

	<http://itsignals.cascadia.com.au/img/addon_file.png>

Step 5: Rename the original image file to .save as is shown in the image
above. We never actually modify the original image file so we end up with
two backup files, the .save as well as the backup file we created in Step 3,
just in case something goes wrong. When you are sure everything has worked
you can always delete these files.

Step 6: We are now ready to combine the image file with the new blank qemu
file we created earlier. You need to be logged in as the super user to
perform this step.

	cat ubuntu-dev.img.save addon.raw >> ubuntu-dev.img

Step 7: Once this completes you can check the new file size, my new file
size is now 50GB which is my original 20GB + 30GB of extra space.

	<http://itsignals.cascadia.com.au/img/expanded_image_file.png>

Step 8: We have successfully increased the size of our image file by 30GB
to 50GB, now we need to fix our partitions. To do this you need to
downloaded GParted and create a live CD. Once you have created the CD and
loaded into your machine run the following command to start GParted using
the new image file.

	sudo qemu -hda ubuntu-dev.img -cdrom /dev/cdrom -boot d

At this point, the article goes on to boot gParted-Live to resize the
partitions. However, this does not work with Logical Volumes. From this
point, what you need to do is read ...

	~/hints/disk/resize-logical-volumes.txt

If you don't have logical volumes, the gParted-Live interface is pretty
straightforward and resizing can continue as per the article.





